Karthekeyan Chandrasekaran
Associate Professor, Department of Industrial and Enterprise Systems EngineeringAffiliate, Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
Research Interests
Combinatorial Optimization, Algorithms, Math Programming, Probabilistic Methods
Bio
B. Tech., Computer Science, IIT MadrasPh.D., Algorithms, Combinatorics and Optimization (ACO), Georgia Tech
Postdoc (Simons), Theory of Computation, Harvard
Recent sabbatical:
- Fall 2022: ELTE, Budapest
- Spring 2023: ICERM
Teaching
-
Graduate-level
- IE 511: Integer Programming - Spring 2015, Spring 2017, Spring 2019, Spring 2021, Spring 2025
- IE 519/CS 586: Combinatorial Optimization - Fall 2015, Spring 2018, Spring 2020, Spring 2024
- IE 310: Deterministic Models in Optimization - Spring 2016, Fall 2016, Fall 2017, Fall 2018, Fall 2019, Fall 2020, Spring 2022, Fall 2023, Fall 2024
- IE 311: Operations Research Lab - Spring 2016, Fall 2016, Fall 2017, Fall 2018
Students
- PhD Advisees
- Weihao Zhu
- Shubhang Kulkarni: May 2025 (Amazon)
Thesis: Algorithmic Aspects of Connectivity and Density in Graphs and Hypergraphs - Calvin Beideman: Aug 2023 (Instructional Assistant Professor at Texas A&M)
Thesis: Cuts and Partitions: Solving, Counting, and Enumerating - Weihang Wang:
May 2023
(Cadence)
Thesis: Algorithms for new objectives in graph partitioning and generalizations - Chao Xu:
May 2018
(Assistant Professor at UESTC)
Thesis: Cuts and Connectivity in Graphs and Hypergraphs (co-advised with Chandra Chekuri)
- Masters Advisees
- Sahand Mozaffari, Aug 2021 (Joined Microsoft)
- Ali Bibak, Aug 2020 (Joined FlexTrade)
- Victor Sui (BS-MCS), May 2020 (Joined Jump Trading LLC)
- Undergrad Advisees
- Richard Bi, May 2025 (Joined as PhD student at CMU)
- Soham Joshi, May 2025 (Joined Quadeye)
- Aditya Pillai, May 2020 (Joined as PhD student at Georgia Tech)
- Jingwen Jiang, May 2016 (Joined as PhD student at University of Chicago)
Publications
- Minimum Cost Nowhere-Zero Flows and Cut-Balanced Orientations
(with Siyue Liu, R. Ravi)
International Colloquium on Automata, Languages and Programming (ICALP), 2025. [arXiv]| [Abstract]
Flows and colorings are disparate concepts in graph algorithms---the former is tractable while the latter is intractable. Tutte introduced the concept of nowhere-zero flows to unify these two concepts. Jaeger showed that nowhere-zero flows are equivalent to cut-balanced orientations. Motivated by connections between nowhere-zero flows, cut-balanced orientations, Nash-Williams' well-balanced orientations, and postman problems, we study optimization versions of nowhere-zero flows and cut-balanced orientations. Given a bidirected graph with asymmetric costs on two orientations of each edge, we study the min cost nowhere-zero k-flow problem and min cost k-cut-balanced orientation problem. We show that both problems are NP-hard to approximate within any finite factor. Given the strong inapproximability result, we design bicriteria approximations for both problems: we obtain a (6,6)-approximation to the min cost nowhere-zero k-flow and a (k,6)-approximation to the min cost k-cut-balanced orientation. For the case of symmetric costs (where the costs of both orientations are the same for every edge), we show that the nowhere-zero k-flow problem remains NP-hard and admits a 3-approximation. - Online Disjoint Spanning Trees and Polymatroid Bases
(with Chandra Chekuri, Weihao Zhu)
International Colloquium on Automata, Languages and Programming (ICALP), 2025. [arXiv]| [Abstract]
Finding the maximum number of disjoint spanning trees in a given graph is a well-studied problem with several applications and connections. The Tutte-Nash-Williams theorem provides a min-max relation for this problem which also extends to disjoint bases in a matroid and leads to efficient algorithms. Several other packing problems such as element disjoint Steiner trees, disjoint set covers, and disjoint dominating sets are NP-Hard but admit an O(logn)-approximation. Calinescu, Chekuri, and Vondr k viewed all these packing problems as packing bases of a polymatroid and provided a unified perspective. Motivated by applications in wireless networks, recent works have studied the problem of packing set covers in the online model. The online model poses new challenges for packing problems. In particular, it is not clear how to pack a maximum number of disjoint spanning trees in a graph when edges arrive online. Motivated by these applications and theoretical considerations, we formulate an online model for packing bases of a polymatroid, and describe a randomized algorithm with a polylogarithmic competitive ratio. Our algorithm is based on interesting connections to the notion of quotients of a polymatroid that has recently seen applications in polymatroid sparsification. We generalize the previously known result for the online disjoint set cover problem and also address several other packing problems in a unified fashion. For the special case of packing disjoint spanning trees in a graph (or a hypergraph) whose edges arrive online, we provide an alternative to our general algorithm that is simpler and faster while achieving the same poly-logarithmic competitive ratio. - Scarf's Algorithm on Arborescence Hypergraphs
(with Yuri Faenza, Chengyue He, Jay Sethuraman)
International Colloquium on Automata, Languages and Programming (ICALP), 2025. [arXiv]| [Abstract]
Scarf s algorithm---a pivoting procedure that finds a dominating extreme point in a down-monotone polytope---can be used to show the existence of a fractional stable matching in hypergraphs. The problem of finding a fractional stable matching in a hypergraph, however, is PPAD-complete. In this work, we study the behavior of Scarf's algorithm on arborescence hypergraphs, the family of hypergraphs in which hyperedges correspond to the paths of an arborescence. For arborescence hypergraphs, we prove that Scarf's algorithm can be implemented to find an integral stable matching in polynomial time. En route to our result, we uncover novel structural properties of bases and pivots for the more general family of network hypergraphs. Our work provides the first proof of polynomial-time convergence of Scarf's algorithm on hypergraphic stable matching problems, giving hope to the possibility of polynomial-time convergence of Scarf's algorithm for other families of polytopes. - On Deleting Vertices to Reduce Density in Graphs and Supermodular Functions
(with Chandra Chekuri, Shubhang Kulkarni)
International Colloquium on Automata, Languages and Programming (ICALP), 2025. [arXiv]| [Abstract]
We consider deletion problems in graphs and supermodular functions where the goal is to reduce density. Given a graph G = (V, E) with non-negative vertex costs and a non-negative parameter rho>=0, the goal in Graph Density Deletion (Graph-DD) is to remove a minimum cost subset S of vertices such that the densest subgraph in G-S has density at most rho. This problem has an underlying matroidal structure and generalizes several classical problems such as vertex cover, feedback vertex set, and pseudoforest deletion set for appropriately chosen rho<=1 and all of these admit a 2-approximation. In sharp contrast, we prove that for every fixed integer rho>1, Graph-DD is hard to approximate to within a logarithmic factor via a reduction from Set Cover, thus showing a phase transition phenomenon. Next, we investigate a generalization of GraphDD to monotone supermodular functions, termed Supermodular Density Deletion (SupmodDD). In SupmodDD, we are given a monotone supermodular function f:2^V?Z_{?0} via an evaluation oracle with element costs and a non-negative integer rho >= 0 and the goal is remove a minimum cost subset S of V such that the densest subset according to f in V?S has density at most rho. We show that SupmodDD is approximation equivalent to the well-known Submodular Cover problem; this implies a tight logarithmic approximation and hardness for SupmodDD; it also implies a logarithmic approximation for GraphDD, thus matching our inapproximability bound. Motivated by these hardness results, we design bicriteria approximation algorithms for both GraphDD and SupmodDD. - Monotone Submodular Multiway Partition
(with Richard Bi, Soham Joshi)
Integer Programming and Combinatorial Optimization (IPCO), 2025. [arXiv]| [Abstract]
In submodular multiway partition (SUB-MP), the input is a non-negative submodular function f from the powerset of V to the non-negative reals given by an evaluation oracle along with k terminals t_1, t_2,..., t_k in V. The goal is to find a partition V_1, V_2, , V_k of V with t_i in V_i for every i in [k] in order to minimize f(V_1) + f(V_2) + + f(V_k). In this work, we focus on SUB-MP when the input function is monotone (termed MONO-SUB-MP). MONO-SUB-MP formulates partitioning problems over several interesting structures---e.g., matrices, matroids, graphs, and hypergraphs. MONO-SUB-MP is NP-hard since the graph multiway cut problem can be cast as a special case. We investigate the approximability of MONO-SUB-MP: we show that it admits a 4/3-approximation and does not admit a (10/9 - eps)-approximation for every constant eps > 0. Next, we study a special case of MONO-SUB-MP where the monotone submodular function of interest is the coverage function of an input graph, termed GRAPH-COV-MP. GRAPH-COV-MP is equivalent to the classic multiway cut problem for the purposes of exact optimization. We show that GRAPH-COV-MP admits a 1.125-approximation and does not admit a (1.00074 - eps)-approximation for every constant eps > 0 assuming the Unique Games Conjecture. These results separate GRAPH-COV-MP from graph multiway cut in terms of approximability. - Polyhedral Aspects of Feedback Vertex Set and Pseudoforest Deletion Set
(with Chandra Chekuri, Samuel Fiorini, Shubhang Kulkarni, Stefan Weltge)
Mathematical Programming, 2024. [arXiv]| [Abstract]
We consider the feedback vertex set problem in undirected graphs (FVS). The input to FVS is an undirected graph G = (V, E) with non-negative vertex costs. The goal is to find a least cost subset S of vertices such that G - S is acyclic. FVS is a well-known NP-hard problem with no (2-epsilon)-approximation assuming the Unique Games Conjecture and it admits a 2-approximation via combinatorial local-ratio methods (Bafna, Berman and Fujito, Algorithms and Computations '95; Becker and Geiger, Artificial Intelligence '96) which can also be interpreted as LP-based primal-dual algorithms (Chudak, Goemans, Hochbaum and Williamson, Operations Research Letters '98). Despite the existence of these algorithms for several decades, there is no known polynomial-time solvable LP relaxation for FVS with a provable integrality gap of at most 2. More recent work (Chekuri and Madan SODA '16) developed a polynomial-sized LP relaxation for a more general problem, namely Subset FVS, and showed that its integrality gap is at most 13 for Subset FVS, and hence also for FVS.
Motivated by this gap in our knowledge, we undertake a polyhedral study of FVS and related problems. In this work, we formulate new integer linear programs (ILPs) for FVS whose LP-relaxation can be solved in polynomial time, and whose integrality gap is at most 2. The new insights in this process also enable us to prove that the formulation in (Chekuri and Madan, SODA '16) has an integrality gap of at most 2 for FVS. Our results for FVS are inspired by new formulations and polyhedral results for the closely-related pseudoforest deletion set problem (PFDS). Our formulations for PFDS are in turn inspired by a connection to the densest subgraph problem. We also conjecture an extreme point property for a LP-relaxation for FVS, and give evidence for the conjecture via a corresponding result for PFDS. - On the Generalized Mean Densest Subgraph Problem: Complexity and Algorithms
(with Chandra Chekuri, Manuel Torres, Weihao Zhu)
International Workshop on Approximation Algorithms for Combinatorial Optimization Problems (APPROX), 2024. [Abstract]
Dense subgraph discovery is an important problem in graph mining and network analysis with several applications. Two canonical polynomial-time solvable problems here are to find a maxcore (subgraph of maximum min degree) and to find a densest subgraph (subgraph of maximum average degree). Both of these problems can be solved in polynomial time. Veldt, Benson, and Kleinberg [KDD 2021] introduced the generalized p-mean densest subgraph problem which captures the maxcore problem when p = - infinity and the densest subgraph problem when p = 1. They observed that for p >= 1, the objective function is supermodular and hence the problem can be solved in polynomial time. In this work, we focus on the p-mean densest subgraph problem for p in (-infinity, 1). We prove that for every p in (-infinity, 1), the problem is NP-hard, thus resolving an open question from Veldt, Benson, and Kleinberg [KDD 2021]. We also show that for every p in (0, 1), the weighted version of the problem is APX-hard. On the algorithmic front, we describe two simple 1/2-approximation algorithms for every p in (-infinity, 1). We complement the approximation algorithms by exhibiting non-trivial instances on which the algorithms simultaneously achieve an approximation factor of at most 1/2. - Hypergraph Connectivity Augmentation in Strongly Polynomial Time
with Kristóf Bérczi, Tamás Király, Shubhang Kulkarni)
European Symposium on Algorithms (ESA), 2024. [arXiv]| [Abstract]
We consider hypergraph network design problems where the goal is to construct a hypergraph that satisfies certain connectivity requirements. For graph network design problems where the goal is to construct a graph that satisfies certain connectivity requirements, the number of edges in every feasible solution is at most quadratic in the number of vertices. In contrast, for hypergraph network design problems, we might have feasible solutions in which the number of hyperedges is exponential in the number of vertices. This presents an additional technical challenge in hypergraph network design problems compared to graph network design problems: in order to solve the problem in polynomial time, we first need to show that there exists a feasible solution in which the number of hyperedges is polynomial in the input size.
The central theme of this work is to show that certain hypergraph network design problems admit solutions in which the number of hyperedges is polynomial in the number of vertices and moreover, can be solved in strongly polynomial time. Our work improves on the previous fastest pseudo-polynomial run-time for these problems. In addition, we develop strongly polynomial time algorithms that return near-uniform hypergraphs as solutions (i.e., every pair of hyperedges differ in size by at most one). As applications of our results, we derive the first strongly polynomial time algorithms for (i) degree-specified hypergraph connectivity augmentation using hyperedges, (ii) degree-specified hypergraph node-to-area connectivity augmentation using hyperedges, and (iii) degree-constrained mixed-hypergraph connectivity augmentation using hyperedges. - Splitting-off in Hypergraphs
(with Kristóf Bérczi, Tamás Király, Shubhang Kulkarni)
International Colloquium on Automata, Languages and Programming (ICALP), 2024. [arXiv]| [Abstract]
The splitting-off operation in undirected graphs is a fundamental reduction operation that detaches all edges incident to a given vertex and adds new edges between the neighbors of that vertex while preserving their degrees. Lov sz (1974) and Mader (1978) showed the existence of this operation while preserving global and local connectivities respectively in graphs under mild conditions. In this work, we introduce a splitting-off operation in hypergraphs. We show that there exists a local connectivity preserving complete splitting-off in hypergraphs and give a strongly polynomial-time algorithm to compute it in weighted hypergraphs. We illustrate the usefulness of our splitting-off operation in hypergraphs by showing two applications:
(1) we give a constructive characterization of k-hyperedge-connected hypergraphs and
(2) we give an alternate proof of an approximate min-max relation for max Steiner rooted-connected orientation of graphs and hypergraphs (due to Kir ly and Lau (Journal of Combinatorial Theory, 2008; FOCS 2006)). Our proof of the approximate min-max relation for graphs circumvents the Nash-Williams' strong orientation theorem and uses tools developed for hypergraphs. - Approximating submodular k-partition via principal partition sequence
(with Weihang Wang)
International Workshop on Approximation Algorithms for Combinatorial Optimization Problems (APPROX), 2023.
SIAM Journal on Discrete Mathematics, 2024. [arXiv]| [Abstract]
In submodular k-partition, the input is a non-negative submodular function f defined over a finite ground set V (given by an evaluation oracle) along with a positive integer k and the goal is to find a partition of the ground set V into k non-empty parts V_1, V_2, ..., V_k in order to minimize sum_{i=1}^k f(V_i). Narayanan, Roy, and Patkar (Journal of Algorithms, 1996) designed an algorithm for submodular k-partition based on the principal partition sequence and showed that the approximation factor of their algorithm is 2 for the special case of graph cut functions (which was subsequently rediscovered by Ravi and Sinha (Journal of Operational Research, 2008)). In this work, we study the approximation factor of their algorithm for three subfamilies of submodular functions---namely monotone, symmetric, and posimodular and show the following results:
1. The approximation factor of their algorithm for monotone submodular k-partition is 4/3. This result improves on the 2-factor that was known to be achievable for monotone submodular k-partition via other algorithms. Moreover, our upper bound of 4/3 matches the recently shown lower bound under polynomial number of function evaluation queries (Santiago, IWOCA 2021). Our upper bound of 4/3 is also the first improvement beyond 2 for a certain graph partitioning problem that is a special case of monotone submodular k-partition.
2. The approximation factor of their algorithm for symmetric submodular k-partition is 2. This result generalizes their approximation factor analysis beyond graph cut functions.
3. The approximation factor of their algorithm for posimodular submodular k-partition is 2.
We also construct an example to show that the approximation factor of their algorithm for arbitrary submodular functions is Omega(n/k). - Approximate minimum cuts and their enumeration
(with Calvin Beideman, Weihang Wang)
Symposium on Simplicity in Algorithms (SOSA), 2023. [pdf]| [arXiv]| [Abstract]
We show that every alpha-approximate minimum cut in a connected graph is the unique minimum (S,T)-terminal cut for some subsets S and T of vertices each of size at most 2 alpha + 1. This leads to an alternative proof that the number of alpha-approximate minimum cuts in a n-vertex connected graph is n^{O(alpha)} and they can all be enumerated in deterministic polynomial time for constant alpha. - Analyzing Residual Random Greedy for monotone submodular maximization
(with Kristóf Bérczi, Tamás Király, Aditya Pillai)
Information Processing Letters, 2023. [Abstract]
Residual Random Greedy (RRGreedy) is a natural randomized version of the greedy algorithm for submodular maximization. It was introduced to address non-monotone submodular maximization (Buchbinder, Feldman, Naor, Schwartz, SODA 2014) and plays an important role in the deterministic algorithm for monotone submodular maximization that beats the (1/2)-factor barrier (Buchbinder, Feldman, Garg, IPCO 2019). In this work, we analyze RRGreedy for monotone submodular functions along two fronts: (1) For matroid constrained maximization of submodular functions with bounded curvature alpha, we show that RRGreedy achieves a (1/(1+alpha))-approximation irrespective of the randomness in the algorithm. In particular, this implies that it achieves a (1/2)-approximation always (not just in expectation). (2) We generalize RRGreedy to k>=2 matroid constraints and show that the generalization achieves a (1/(k+1))-approximation in expectation relative to the optimum value of the Lovasz extension over the intersection of k matroid polytopes. Our results suggest that RRGreedy is at least as good as Greedy for matroid and matroid intersection constraints. - Approximate Representation of Symmetric
Submodular Functions via Hypergraph Cut
Functions
(with Calvin Beideman, Chandra Chekuri, Chao Xu)
Foundations of Software Technology and Theoretical Computer Science (FSTTCS), 2022. [Abstract]
Submodular functions are fundamental to combinatorial optimization. Many interesting problems can be formulated as special cases of problems involving submodular functions. In this work, we consider the problem of approximating symmetric submodular functions everywhere using hypergraph cut functions. Devanur, Dughmi, Schwartz, Sharma, and Singh (arXiv: 1304.4948, 2013) showed that symmetric submodular functions over n-element ground sets cannot be approximated within (n/8)-factor using a graph cut function and raised the question of approximating them using hypergraph cut functions. Our main result is that there exist symmetric submodular functions over n-element ground sets that cannot be approximated within a o(n^{1/3}/log^2 n)-factor using a hypergraph cut function. On the positive side, we show that symmetrized concave linear functions and symmetrized rank functions of uniform matroids and partition matroids can be constant-approximated using hypergraph cut functions. - Counting and enumerating optimum cut sets for hypergraph k-partitioning problems for fixed k
(with Calvin Beideman, Weihang Wang)
Preliminary version in International Colloquium on Automata, Languages and Programming (ICALP), 2022.
Mathematics of Operations Research, 2024. [pdf]| [arXiv]| [Abstract]
We consider the problem of enumerating optimal solutions for two hypergraph k-partitioning problems---namely, MinMax-Hypergraph-k-Partition and Hypergraph-k-Cut. The input in hypergraph k-partitioning problems is a hypergraph G=(V, E) with non-negative hyperedge costs along with a fixed positive integer k. The goal is to find a partition of V into k non-empty parts (V_1, V_2, ..., V_k)---known as a k-partition---so as to minimize an objective of interest.
(1) If the objective of interest is the maximum cut value of the parts, then the problem is known as MinMax-Hypergraph-k-Partition. A subset of hyperedges is a Minmax-k-cut-set if it is the subset of hyperedges crossing an optimum k-partition for MinMax-Hypergraph-k-Partition.
(2) If the objective of interest is the total cost of hyperedges crossing the k-partition, then the problem is known as Hypergraph-k-Cut. A subset of hyperedges is a Min-k-cut-set if it is the subset of hyperedges crossing an optimum k-partition for Hypergraph-k-Cut.
We give the first polynomial bound on the number of Minmax-k-cut-sets and a polynomial-time algorithm to enumerate all of them in hypergraphs for every fixed k. Our technique is strong enough to also enable an n^{O(k)}p-time deterministic algorithm to enumerate all min-k-cut-sets in hypergraphs, thus improving on the previously known n^{O(k^2)}p-time deterministic algorithm, where n is the number of vertices and p is the size of the hypergraph. The correctness analysis of our enumeration approach relies on a structural result that is a strong and unifying generalization of known structural results for Hypergraph-k-Cut and MinMax-Hypergraph-k-Partition. We believe that our structural result is likely to be of independent interest in the theory of hypergraphs (and graphs). - Faster Connectivity in Low-rank Hypergraphs via Expander Decomposition
(with Calvin Beideman, Sagnik Mukhopadhyay, Danupon Nanongkai)
Integer Programming and Combinatorial Optimization (IPCO), 2022. [arXiv]| [Abstract]
We design an algorithm for computing connectivity in hypergraphs which runs in time hat{O}_r(p + min{lambda n^2, n^r/lambda}), where p is the size, n is the number of vertices, and r is the rank of the hypergraph. Our algorithm is faster than existing algorithms when the connectivity lambda is Omega(n^{(r-2)/2}). At the heart of our algorithm is a structural result regarding min-cuts in simple hypergraphs: we show a trade-off between the number of hyperedges taking part in all min-cuts and the size of the smaller side of the min-cut. This structural result can be viewed as a generalization of a well-known structural theorem for simple graphs [Kawarabayashi-Thorup, JACM 19]. We extend the framework of expander decomposition to simple hypergraphs in order to prove this structural result. We also make the proof of the structural result constructive to obtain our faster hypergraph connectivity algorithm. - Deterministic enumeration of all minimum cut-sets and k-cut-sets in hypergraphs for fixed k
(with Calvin Beideman, Weihang Wang)
Preliminary version in ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), 2022.
Mathematical Programming, 2024. [pdf]| [arXiv]| [Abstract]
We consider the problem of deterministically enumerating all minimum k-cut-sets in a given hypergraph for any fixed k. The input here is a hypergraph G = (V, E) with non-negative hyperedge costs. A subset F of hyperedges is a k-cut-set if the number of connected components in G - F is at least k and it is a minimum k-cut-set if it has the least cost among all k-cut-sets. For fixed k, we call the problem of finding a minimum k-cut-set as Hypergraph-k-Cut and the problem of enumerating all minimum k-cut-sets as Enum-Hypergraph-k-Cut. The special cases of Hypergraph-k-Cut and Enum-Hypergraph-k-Cut restricted to graph inputs are well-known to be solvable in (randomized as well as deterministic) polynomial time. In contrast, it is only recently that polynomial-time algorithms for Hypergraph-k-Cut were developed. The randomized polynomial-time algorithm for Hypergraph-k-Cut that was designed in 2018 (Chandrasekaran, Xu, and Yu, SODA 2018) showed that the number of minimum k-cut-sets in a hypergraph is O(n^{2k-2}), where n is the number of vertices in the input hypergraph, and that they can all be enumerated in randomized polynomial time, thus resolving Enum-Hypergraph-k-Cut in randomized polynomial time. A deterministic polynomial-time algorithm for Hypergraph-k-Cut was subsequently designed in 2020 (Chandrasekaran and Chekuri, FOCS 2020), but it is not guaranteed to enumerate all minimum k-cut-sets. In this work, we give the first deterministic polynomial-time algorithm to solve Enum-Hypergraph-k-Cut (this is non-trivial even for k = 2). Our algorithm is based on new structural results that allow for efficient recovery of all minimum k-cut-sets by solving minimum (S,T)-terminal cuts. Our techniques give new structural insights even for enumerating all minimum cut-sets (i.e., minimum 2-cut-sets) in a given hypergraph. - lp-norm Multiway Cut
(with Weihang Wang)
Preliminary version in European Symposium on Algorithms (ESA), 2021.
Algorithmica, 2022. [pdf]| [arXiv]| [Abstract]
We introduce and study l_p-norm multiway cut: the input here is an undirected graph with non-negative edge weights along with k terminals and the goal is to find a partition of the vertex set into k parts each containing exactly one terminal so as to minimize the l_p-norm of the cut values of the parts. This is a unified generalization of min-sum multiway cut (when p=1) and min-max multiway cut (when p=infinity), both of which are well-studied classic problems in the graph partitioning literature. Our motivation behind studying the l_p-norm objective is that it acts as a fairness inducing objective based on p. We show that l_p-norm multiway cut is NP-hard for constant number of terminals and is NP-hard in planar graphs. On the algorithmic side, we design an O(log^2 n)-approximation for all p>=1. We also show an integrality gap of Omega(k^{1-1/p}) for a natural convex program and an O(k^{1-1/p-epsilon})-inapproximability for any constant epsilon>0 assuming the small set expansion hypothesis. - Fixed Parameter Approximation Scheme for Min-max k-cut
(with Weihang Wang)
Preliminary version in Integer Programming and Combinatorial Optimization (IPCO), 2021.
Mathematical Programming, 2022. [pdf]| [arXiv]| [Abstract]
We consider the graph k-partitioning problem under the min-max objective, termed as Minmax k-cut. The input here is a graph G = (V, E) with non-negative edge weights w: E -> R_+ and an integer k>=2 and the goal is to partition the vertices into k non-empty parts V_1, ..., V_k so as to minimize max_{i=1}^k w(\delta(V_i)). Although minimizing the sum objective sum_{i=1}^k w(\delta(V_i)), termed as Minsum k-cut, has been studied extensively in the literature, very little is known about minimizing the max objective. We initiate the study of Minmax k-cut by showing that it is NP-hard and W[1]-hard when parameterized by k, and design a parameterized approximation scheme when parameterized by k. The main ingredient of our parameterized approximation scheme is an exact algorithm for Minmax k-cut that runs in time (lambda k)^{O(k^2)}n^{O(1)}, where lambda is value of the optimum and n is the number of vertices. Our algorithmic technique builds on the technique of Lokshtanov, Saurabh, and Surianarayanan (FOCS, 2020) who showed a similar result for Minsum k-cut. Our algorithmic techniques are more general and can be used to obtain parameterized approximation schemes for minimizing l_p-norm measures of k-partitioning for every p>=1. - Min-max Partitioning of Hypergraphs and Symmetric Submodular Functions
(with Chandra Chekuri)
Preliminary version in ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), 2021.
Combinatorica, 2023. [pdf]| [Abstract]
We consider the complexity of minmax partitioning of graphs, hypergraphs and (symmetric) submodular functions. Our main result is an algorithm for the problem of partitioning the ground set of a given symmetric submodular function f: 2^V --> R into k non-empty parts V_1, V_2, ...,V_k to minimize max_{i in [k]} f(V_i). Our algorithm runs in n^{O(k^2)}T time, where n = |V| and T is the time to evaluate f on a given set; hence, this yields a polynomial time algorithm for any fixed k in the evaluation oracle model. As an immediate corollary, for any fixed k, there is a polynomial-time algorithm for the problem of partitioning a given hypergraph H = (V, E) into k non-empty parts to minimize the maximum capacity of the parts. The complexity of this problem, termed MinMax-Hypergraph-k-Part, was raised by Lawler in 1973 (Networks, Vol. 3, pp 275--285). In contrast to our positive result, a reduction by Chekuri and Li (2015) implies that when k is part of the input, MinMax-Hypergraph-k-Part is hard to approximate to within an almost polynomial factor under the Exponential Time Hypothesis (ETH). - Fixed-Parameter Algorithms for Longest Heapable Subsequence and Maximum Binary Tree
(with Elena Grigorescu, Gabriel Istrate, Shubhang Kulkarni, Young-San Lin, Minshen Zhu)
International Symposium on Parameterized and Exact Computation (IPEC), 2020. [pdf]| [arXiv]| [Abstract]
A heapable sequence is a sequence of numbers that can be arranged in a min-heap data structure. Finding a longest heapable subsequence of a given sequence was proposed by Byers, Heeringa, Mitzenmacher, and Zervas (ANALCO 2011) as a generalization of the well-studied longest increasing subsequence problem and its complexity still remains open. An equivalent formulation of the longest heapable subsequence problem is that of finding a maximum-sized binary tree in a given permutation directed acyclic graph (permutation DAG). In this work, we study parameterized algorithms for both longest heapable subsequence and maximum-sized binary tree. We show the following results:
(1) We show that the longest heapable subsequence problem can be solved in k^{O(log{k})}n time, where k is the number of distinct values in the input sequence of length n.
(2) We introduce alphabet size as a new parameter in the study of computational problems in permutation DAGs. Our result on longest heapable subsequence implies that the maximum-sized binary tree problem in a given permutation DAG is fixed-parameter tractable when parameterized by the alphabet size.
(3) We show that the alphabet size with respect to a fixed topological ordering can be computed in polynomial time, admits a min-max relation, and has a polyhedral description.
(4) We show that the maximum-sized binary tree problem in undirected graphs can be solved in w^{O(w)}n time, where w is the treewidth and n is the number of vertices in the input graph.
Our results make progress towards understanding the complexity of longest heapable subsequence and maximum-sized binary tree problems from the perspective of parameterized algorithms. We believe that the parameter alphabet size that we introduce is likely to be useful in the context of optimization problems defined over permutation DAGs. - Hypergraph k-cut for fixed k in deterministic polynomial time
(with Chandra Chekuri)
Preliminary version in IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), 2020.
Mathematics of Operations Research, 2022. [pdf]| [arXiv]| [Abstract]
We consider the Hypergraph-k-cut problem. The input consists of a hypergraph G = (V, E) with non-negative hyperedge-costs c: E --> R_+ and a positive integer k. The objective is to find a least-cost subset F of hyperedges of E such that the number of connected components in G - F is at least k. An alternative formulation of the objective is to find a partition of V into k non-empty sets V_1, V_2, ..., V_k so as to minimize the cost of the hyperedges that cross the partition. Graph-k-cut, the special case of Hypergraph-k-cut obtained by restricting to graph inputs, has received considerable attention. Several different approaches lead to a polynomial-time algorithm for Graph-k-cut when k is fixed, starting with the work of Goldschmidt and Hochbaum (1988). In contrast, it is only recently that a randomized polynomial time algorithm for Hypergraph-k-cut was developed (Chandrasekaran, Xu, Yu, SODA 2018) via a subtle generalization of Karger's random contraction approach for graphs. In this work, we develop the first deterministic polynomial time algorithm for Hypergraph-k-cut for all fixed k. We describe two algorithms both of which are based on a divide and conquer approach. The first algorithm is simpler and runs in n^{O(k^2)} time while the second one runs in n^{O(k)} time. Our proof relies on new structural results that allow for efficient recovery of the parts of an optimum k-partition by solving minimum (s,t)-terminal cuts. Our techniques give new insights even for Graph-k-cut. - Multicriteria cuts and size-constrained k-cuts in hypergraphs
(with Calvin Beideman, Chao Xu)
Preliminary version in International Conference on Randomization and Computation (RANDOM), 2020.
Mathematical Programming, 2022. [pdf]| [arXiv]| [Abstract]
We address counting and optimization variants of multicriteria global min-cut and size-constrained min-k-cut in hypergraphs.
1. For an r-rank n-vertex hypergraph endowed with t hyperedge-cost functions, we show that the number of multiobjective min-cuts is O(r2^{tr}n^{3t-1}). In particular, this shows that the number of parametric min-cuts in constant rank hypergraphs for a constant number of criteria is strongly polynomial, thus resolving an open question by Aissi, Mahjoub, McCormick, and Queyranne (Math Programming, 2015). In addition, we give randomized algorithms to enumerate all multiobjective min-cuts and all pareto-optimal cuts in strongly polynomial-time.
2. We also address node-budgeted multiobjective min-cuts: For an n-vertex hypergraph endowed with t vertex-weight functions, we show that the number of node-budgeted multiobjective min-cuts is O(r2^{r}n^{t+2}), where r is the rank of the hypergraph, and the number of node-budgeted b-multiobjective min-cuts for a fixed budget-vector b is O(n^2).
3. We show that min-k-cut in hypergraphs subject to constant lower bounds on part sizes is solvable in polynomial-time for constant k, thus resolving an open problem posed by Queyranne. Our technique also shows that the number of optimal solutions is polynomial.
All of our results build on the random contraction approach of Karger (SODA, 1993). Our techniques illustrate the versatility of the random contraction approach to address counting and algorithmic problems concerning multiobjective min-cuts and size-constrained k-cuts in hypergraphs. - The Maximum Binary Tree Problem
(with Elena Grigorescu, Gabriel Istrate, Shubhang Kulkarni, Young-San Lin, Minshen Zhu)
Preliminary version in European Symposium on Algorithms (ESA), 2020.
Algorithmica, 2021. [pdf]| [arXiv]| [Abstract]
We introduce and investigate the approximability of the maximum binary tree problem (MBT) in directed and undirected graphs. The goal in MBT is to find a maximum-sized binary tree in a given graph. MBT is a natural variant of the well-studied longest path problem, since both can be viewed as finding a maximum-sized tree of bounded degree in a given graph.
The connection to longest path motivates the study of MBT in directed acyclic graphs (DAGs), since the longest path problem is solvable efficiently in DAGs. In contrast, we show that MBT in DAGs is in fact hard: it has no efficient exp(-O(log n/ log log n))-approximation algorithm under the exponential time hypothesis, where n is the number of vertices in the input graph. In undirected graphs, we show that MBT has no efficient exp(-O(log^{0.63}{n}))-approximation under the exponential time hypothesis. Our inapproximability results rely on self-improving reductions and structural properties of binary trees. We also show constant-factor inapproximability under the P neq NP assumption.
In addition to inapproximability results, we present algorithmic results along two different flavors: (1) We design a randomized algorithm to verify if a given directed graph on n vertices contains a binary tree of size k in 2^k poly(n) time. (2) Motivated by the longest heapable subsequence problem, introduced by Byers, Heeringa, Mitzenmacher, and Zervas, (ANALCO 2011), which is equivalent to MBT in permutation DAGs, we design efficient algorithms for MBT in bipartite permutation graphs. - Spectral Aspects of Symmetric Matrix Signings
(with Charles Carlson, Hsien-Chih Chang, Naonori Kakimura, Alexandra Kolla)
Preliminary version in Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science (MFCS), 2019.
Discrete Optimization, 2020. [pdf]| [arXiv]| [Abstract]
The spectra of signed matrices have played a fundamental role in social sciences, graph theory, and control theory. In this work, we investigate the computational problems of finding symmetric signings of matrices with natural spectral properties. Our results are the following:
1. We characterize matrices that have an invertible signing: a symmetric matrix has an invertible symmetric signing if and only if the support graph of the matrix contains a perfect 2-matching. Further, we present an efficient algorithm to search for an invertible symmetric signing.
2. We use the above-mentioned characterization to give an algorithm to find a minimum increase in the support of a given symmetric matrix so that it has an invertible symmetric signing.
3. We show NP-completeness of the following problems: verifying whether a given matrix has a symmetric off-diagonal signing that is singular/has bounded eigenvalues. However, we also illustrate that the complexity could differ substantially for input matrices that are adjacency matrices of graphs.
We use combinatorial techniques in addition to classic results from matching theory.
- Improving the Integrality Gap for Multiway Cut
(with Kristóf Bérczi, Tamás Király, Vivek Madan)
Preliminary version in Integer Programming and Combinatorial Optimization (IPCO), 2019.
Mathematical Programming, 2020. [pdf]+[supplement]| [arXiv]| [Abstract]
In the multiway cut problem, we are given an undirected graph with non-negative edge weights and a collection of k terminal nodes, and the goal is to partition the node set of the graph into k non-empty parts each containing exactly one terminal so that the total weight of the edges crossing the partition is minimized. The multiway cut problem for k>=3 is APX-hard. For arbitrary k, the best-known approximation factor is 1.2965 due to Sharma and Vondrak while the best known inapproximability factor is 1.2 due to Angelidakis, Makarychev and Manurangsi. In this work, we improve on the lower bound to 1.20016 by constructing an integrality gap instance for the CKR relaxation.
A technical challenge in improving the gap has been the lack of geometric tools to understand higher-dimensional simplices. Our instance is a non-trivial 3-dimensional instance that overcomes this technical challenge. We analyze the gap of the instance by viewing it as a convex combination of 2-dimensional instances and a uniform 3-dimensional instance. We believe that this technique could be exploited further to construct instances with larger integrality gap. One of the byproducts from our proof technique is a generalization of a result on Sperner admissible labelings due to Mirzakhani and Vondrak that might be of independent combinatorial interest. - Improving the smoothed complexity of FLIP for max cut problems
(with Ali Bibak, Charles Carlson)
Preliminary version in ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), 2019.
ACM Transactions on Algorithms, 2021. [pdf]| [arXiv]| [Abstract]
Finding locally optimal solutions for max-cut and max-k-cut are well-known PLS-complete problems. An instinctive approach to finding such a locally optimum solution is the FLIP method. Even though FLIP requires exponential time in worst-case instances, it tends to terminate quickly in practical instances. To explain this discrepancy, the run-time of FLIP has been studied in the smoothed complexity framework. Etscheid and R glin [ER17] showed that the smoothed complexity of FLIP for max-cut in arbitrary graphs is quasi-polynomial. Angel, Bubeck, Peres, and Wei [ABPW17] showed that the smoothed complexity of FLIP for max-cut in complete graphs is O(phi^5 n^15.1), where phi is an upper bound on the random edge-weight density and n is the number of vertices in the input graph.
While Angel et al. s result showed the first polynomial smoothed complexity, they also conjectured that their run-time bound is far from optimal. In this work, we make substantial progress towards improving the run-time bound. We prove that the smoothed complexity of FLIP in complete graphs is O(phi n^(7.83)). Our results are based on a carefully chosen matrix whose rank captures the run-time of the method along with improved rank bounds for this matrix and an improved union bound based on this matrix. In addition, our techniques provide a general framework for analyzing the FLIP method in the smoothed framework. We illustrate this general framework by showing that the smoothed complexity of FLIP for max-3-cut in complete graphs is polynomial and for max-k-cut in arbitrary graphs is quasi-polynomial. We believe that our techniques should also be of interest towards addressing the smoothed complexity of FLIP for max-k-cut in complete graphs for larger constants k. - Beating the 2-approximation factor for global bicut
(with Kristóf Bérczi, Tamás Király, Euiwoong Lee, Chao Xu)
Mathematical Programming, 2019. [pdf]| [Abstract]
In the fixed-terminal bicut problem, the input is a directed graph with two specified nodes s and t and the goal is to find a smallest subset of edges whose removal ensures that s cannot reach t and t cannot reach s. In the global bicut problem, the input is a directed graph and the goal is to find a smallest subset of edges whose removal ensures that there exist two nodes s and t such that s cannot reach t and t cannot reach s. Fixed-terminal bicut and global bicut are natural extensions of {s,t}-min cut and global min-cut respectively, from undirected graphs to directed graphs. Fixed-terminal bicut is NP-hard, admits a simple 2-approximation, and does not admit a (2-eps)-approximation for any constant eps>0 assuming the unique games conjecture. In this work, we show that global bicut admits a (2-1/448)-approximation, thus improving on the approximability of the global variant in comparison to the fixed-terminal variant. - Additive Stabilizers for Unstable Graphs
(with Corinna Gottschalk, Jochen Könemann, Britta Peis, Daniel Schmand, Andreas Wierz)
Discrete Optimization, 2019. [pdf]| [arXiv]| [Abstract]
Stabilization of graphs has received substantial attention in recent years due to its connection to game theory. Stable graphs are exactly the graphs inducing a matching game with non-empty core. They are also the graphs that induce a network bargaining game with a balanced solution. A graph with weighted edges is called stable if the maximum weight of an integral matching equals the cost of a minimum fractional weighted vertex cover. If a graph is not stable, it can be stabilized in different ways. Recent papers have considered the deletion or addition of edges and vertices in order to stabilize a graph. In this work, we focus on a fine-grained stabilization strategy, namely stabilization of graphs by fractionally increasing edge weights.
We show the following results for stabilization by minimum weight increase in edge weights (min additive stabilizer): (i) Any approximation algorithm for min additive stabilizer that achieves a factor of O(|V|^(1/24-eps)) for eps>0 would lead to improvements in the approximability of densest-k-subgraph. (ii) Min additive stabilizer has no o(log|V|) approximation unless NP=P. Results (i) and (ii) together provide the first super-constant hardness results for any graph stabilization problem. On the algorithmic side, we present (iii) an algorithm to solve min additive stabilizer in factor-critical graphs exactly in poly-time, (iv) an algorithm to solve min additive stabilizer in arbitrary-graphs exactly in time exponential in the size of the Tutte set, and (v) a poly-time algorithm with approximation factor at most O(sqrt(|V|)) for a super-class of the instances generated in our hardness proofs.
- Lattice-based Locality Sensitive Hashing is Optimal
(with Daniel Dadush, Venkata Gandikota, Elena Grigorescu)
Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science (ITCS), 2018. [pdf]| [Abstract]
Locality sensitive hashing (LSH) was introduced by Indyk and Motwani (STOC '98) to give the first sublinear time algorithm for the $c$-approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) problem using only polynomial space. At a high level, LSH family hashes "nearby" points to the same bucket and "far away" points to different buckets. The quality of measure of an LSH family is its LSH exponent, which helps determine both the query time and space usage. In a seminal work, Andoni and Indyk (FOCS '06) constructed an LSH family based on random ball partitionings of space that achieves an LSH exponent of 1/c^2 for the l_2-norm, which was later shown to be optimal by O'Donnell, Wu and Zhou (TOCT '14). Although optimal in the LSH exponent, the ball partitioning approach is computationally expensive. So, in the same work, Andoni and Indyk proposed a simpler and more practical hashing scheme based on Euclidean lattices and provided computational results using the 24-dimensional Leech lattice. However, no theoretical analysis of the scheme was given, thus leaving open the question of finding the exponent of lattice based LSH. In this work, we resolve this question by showing the existence of lattices achieving the optimal LSH exponent of 1/c^2 using techniques from the geometry of numbers. At a more conceptual level, our results show that optimal LSH space partitions can have periodic structure. Understanding the extent to which additional structure can be imposed on these partitions, e.g. to yield low space and query complexity, remains an important open problem. - Hypergraph k-cut in randomized polynomial time
(with Chao Xu, Xilin Yu)
Preliminary version in ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), 2018.
Mathematical Programming, 2019. [pdf]| [Abstract]
In the hypergraph k-cut problem, the input is a hypergraph, and the goal is to find a smallest subset of hyperedges whose removal ensures that the remaining hypergraph has at least k connected components. This problem is known to be at least as hard as the densest k-subgraph problem when k is part of the input (Chekuri-Li, 2015). We present a randomized polynomial time algorithm to solve the hypergraph k-cut problem for constant k.
Our algorithm solves the more general hedge k-cut problem when the subgraph induced by every hedge has a constant number of connected components. In the hedge k-cut problem, the input is a hedgegraph specified by a vertex set and a disjoint set of hedges, where each hedge is a subset of edges defined over the vertices. The goal is to find a smallest subset of hedges whose removal ensures that the number of connected components in the remaining underlying (multi-)graph is at least k.
Our algorithm is based on random contractions akin to Karger's min cut algorithm. Our main technical contribution is a distribution over the hedges (hyperedges) so that random contraction of hedges (hyperedges) chosen from the distribution succeeds in returning an optimum solution with large probability. - A tight √2-approximation for Linear 3-Cut
(with Kristóf Bérczi, Tamás Király, Vivek Madan)
Preliminary version in ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), 2018.
Mathematical Programming, 2019. [pdf]| [Abstract]
We investigate the approximability of the linear 3-cut problem in directed graphs, which is the simplest unsolved case of the linear k-cut problem. The input here is a directed graph D=(V,E) with node weights and three specified terminal nodes s, r, t in V, and the goal is to find a minimum weight subset of non-terminal nodes whose removal ensures that s cannot reach r and t, and r cannot reach t. The problem is approximation-equivalent to the problem of blocking rooted in- and out-arborescences, and it also has applications in network coding and security.
The approximability of linear 3-cut has been wide open until now: the best known lower bound under the Unique Game Conjecture (UGC) was 4/3, while the best known upper bound was 2 using a trivial algorithm. In this work we completely close this gap: we present a √2-approximation algorithm and show that this factor is tight assuming UGC. Our contributions are twofold:
(1) we analyze a natural two-step deterministic rounding scheme through the lens of a single-step randomized rounding scheme with non-trivial distributions, and
(2) we construct integrality gap instances that meet the upper bound of √2. Our gap instances can be viewed as a weighted graph sequence converging to a "graph limit structure". - Graph Stabilization: A Survey
Combinatorial Optimization and Graph Algorithms: Communications of NII Shonan Meetings, 2017. [pdf]| [Abstract]
Graph stabilization has raised a family of network design problems that has received considerable attention recently. Stable graphs are those graphs for which the matching game has non-empty core. In the optimization terminology, they are graphs for which the fractional matching linear program has an integral optimum solution. Graph stabilization involves minimally modifying a given graph to make it stable. In this survey, we outline recent developments in graph stabilization and highlight some open problems. - Odd Multiway Cut in Directed Acyclic Graphs
(with Sahand Mozaffari)
Preliminary version in International Symposium on Parameterized and Exact Computation (IPEC), 2017.
SIAM Journal on Discrete Mathematics, 2020. [pdf]| [arXiv]| [Abstract]
We investigate the odd multiway node (edge) cut problem where the input is a graph with a specified collection of terminal nodes and the goal is to find a smallest subset of non-terminal nodes (edges) to delete so that the terminal nodes do not have an odd length path between them. In earlier work, Lokshtanov and Ramanujan showed that both odd multiway node cut and odd multiway edge cut are fixed-parameter tractable (FPT) when parameterized by the size of the solution in undirected graphs. In this work, we focus on directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) and design a fixed-parameter algorithm. Our main contribution is an extension of the shadow-removal framework for parity problems in DAGs. We complement our FPT results with tight approximability as well as polyhedral results for 2 terminals in DAGs. Additionally, we show inapproximability results for odd multiway edge cut in undirected graphs even for 2 terminals.
- Global and fixed-terminal cuts in digraphs
(with Kristóf Bérczi, Tamás Király, Euiwoong Lee, Chao Xu)
International Workshop on Approximation Algorithms for Combinatorial Optimization Problems (APPROX), 2017. [pdf]| [arXiv]| [Abstract]
The computational complexity of multicut-like problems may vary significantly depending on whether the terminals are fixed or not. In this work we present a comprehensive study of this phenomenon in two types of cut problems in directed graphs: double cut and bicut.
1. The fixed-terminal edge-weighted double cut is known to be solvable efficiently. We show a tight approximability factor of 2 for the fixed-terminal node-weighted double cut. We show that the global node-weighted double cut cannot be approximated to a factor smaller than 3/2 under the Unique Games Conjecture (UGC).
2. The fixed-terminal edge-weighted bicut is known to have a tight approximability factor of 2. We show that the global edge-weighted bicut is approximable to a factor strictly better than 2, and that the global node-weighted bicut cannot be approximated to a factor smaller than 3/2 under UGC.
3. In relation to these investigations, we also prove two results on undirected graphs which are of independent interest. First, we show NP-completeness and a tight inapproximability bound of 4/3 for the node-weighted 3-cut problem. Second, we show that for constant k, there exists an efficient algorithm to solve the minimum {s,t}-separating k-cut problem.
Our techniques for the algorithms are combinatorial, based on LPs and based on enumeration of approximate min-cuts. Our hardness results are based on combinatorial reductions and integrality gap instances.
- On the Expansion of Group-Based Lifts
(with Naman Agarwal, Alexandra Kolla, Vivek Madan)
Preliminary version in International Workshop on Randomization and Computation (RANDOM), 2017.
SIAM Journal on Discrete Mathematics, 2019. [pdf]| [arXiv]| [Abstract]
A k-lift of an n-vertex base graph G is a graph H on n x k vertices, where each vertex v of G is replaced by k vertices v_1,...,v_k and each edge uv in G is replaced by a matching representing a bijection pi_{uv} so that the edges of H are of the form (u_i,v_{pi_{uv}(i)}). Lifts have been investigated as a means to efficiently construct expanders. In this work, we study lifts obtained from groups and group actions. We derive the spectrum of such lifts via the representation theory principles of the underlying group. Our main results are:
(1) A uniform random lift by a cyclic group of order k of any n-vertex d-regular base graph G, with the nontrivial eigenvalues of the adjacency matrix of G bounded by lambda in magnitude, has the new nontrivial eigenvalues bounded by lambda+O(sqrt{d}) in magnitude with probability 1-ke^{-Omega(n/d^2)}. The probability bounds as well as the dependency on lambda are almost optimal. As a special case, we obtain that there is a constant c_1 such that for every k<=2^{c_1n/d^2}, there exists a lift H of every Ramanujan graph by a cyclic group of order k such that H is almost Ramanujan (nontrivial eigenvalues of the adjacency matrix at most O(sqrt{d}) in magnitude). This result leads to a quasi-polynomial time deterministic algorithm to construct almost Ramanujan expanders.
(2) There is a constant c_2 such that for every k>=2^{c_2nd}, there does NOT exist an abelian k-lift H of any n-vertex d-regular base graph such that H is almost Ramanujan. This can be viewed as an analogue of the well-known no-expansion result for constant degree abelian Cayley graphs.
Suppose k_0 is the order of the largest abelian group that produces expanding lifts. Our two results highlight lower and upper bounds on k_0 that are tight upto a factor of d^3 in the exponent, thus suggesting a threshold phenomenon.
- Shift Lifts Preserving Ramanujan Property
(with Ameya Velingker)
Linear Algebra and its Applications, 2017. [pdf]| [arXiv]| [Abstract]
In a breakthrough work, Marcus-Spielman-Srivastava recently showed that every d-regular bipartite Ramanujan graph has a 2-lift that is also d-regular bipartite Ramanujan. As a consequence, a straightforward iterative brute-force search algorithm leads to the construction of a d-regular bipartite Ramanujan graph on N vertices in time 2^O(dN). Shift k-lifts studied by Agarwal-Kolla-Madan lead to a natural approach for constructing Ramanujan graphs more efficiently. The number of possible shift k-lifts of a d-regular n-vertex graph is k^(nd/2). Suppose the following holds for k=2^{\Omega(n)}:
There exists a shift k-lift that maintains the Ramanujan property of d-regular bipartite graphs on n vertices for all n. ---- (*)
Then, by performing a similar brute-force search, one would be able to construct an N-vertex bipartite Ramanujan graph in time 2^O(dlog^2 N). Furthermore, if (*) holds for all k>=2, then one would obtain an algorithm that runs in poly(N^d) time. In this work, we take a first step towards proving (*) by showing the existence of shift k-lifts that preserve the Ramanujan property in d-regular bipartite graphs for k=3, 4.
- Local Testing for Membership in Lattices
(with Mahdi Cheraghchi, Venkata Gandikota, Elena Grigorescu)
Preliminary version in Foundations of Software Technology and Theoretical Computer Science (FSTTCS), 2016.
SIAM Journal on Discrete Mathematics, 2018. [pdf]| [arXiv]| [Abstract]
Motivated by the structural analogies between point lattices and linear error-correcting codes, and by the mature theory on locally testable codes, we initiate a systematic study of local testing for membership in lattices. Testing membership in lattices is also motivated in practice, by applications to integer programming, error detection in lattice-based communication, and cryptography. Apart from establishing the conceptual foundations of lattice testing, our results include the following:
1. We demonstrate upper and lower bounds on the query complexity of local testing for the well-known family of code formula lattices. Furthermore, we instantiate our results with code formula lattices constructed from Reed-Muller codes, and obtain nearly-tight bounds.
2. We show that in order to achieve low query complexity, it is sufficient to design one-sided non-adaptive canonical tests. This result is akin to, and based on an analogous result for error-correcting codes due to Ben-Sasson et al. (SIAM J. Computing 35(1) pp 1-21).
- Deciding Orthogonality in Construction-A Lattices
(with Venkata Gandikota, Elena Grigorescu)
Preliminary version in Foundations of Software Technology and Theoretical Computer Science (FSTTCS), 2015.
SIAM Journal on Discrete Mathematics, 2017. [pdf]| [arXiv]| [Abstract]
Lattices are discrete mathematical objects with widespread applications to integer programs as well as modern cryptography. A fundamental problem in both domains is the Closest Vector Problem (popularly known as CVP). It is well-known that CVP can be easily solved in lattices that have an orthogonal basis if the orthogonal basis is specified. This motivates the orthogonality decision problem: verify whether a given lattice has an orthogonal basis. Surprisingly, the orthogonality decision problem is not known to be either NP-complete or in P.
In this work, we focus on the orthogonality decision problem for a well-known family of lattices, namely Construction A lattices. These are lattices of the form C+qZ^n, where C is an error-correcting q-ary code, and are studied in communication settings. We provide a complete characterization of lattices obtained from binary and ternary codes using Construction A that have an orthogonal basis. This characterization leads to an efficient algorithm solving the orthogonality decision problem, which also finds an orthogonal basis if one exists for this family of lattices. We believe that these results could provide a better understanding of the complexity of the orthogonality decision problem in general.
- Finding Small Stabilizers for Unstable Graphs
(with Adrian Bock, Jochen Könemann, Britta Peis, Laura Sanità)
Preliminary version in Integer Programming and Combinatorial Optimization (IPCO), 2014.
Mathematical Programming, Vol. 154, Issue 1, 2015. [pdf]| [Abstract]
An undirected graph G=(V,E) is stable if the cardinality of a maximum matching equals the size of a minimum fractional vertex cover. We call a set of edges F subseteq E to be a stabilizer if its removal from G yields a stable graph. In this paper we study the following natural edge-deletion question: given a graph G=(V,E), can we find a minimum-cardinality stabilizer? Stable graphs play an important role in cooperative game theory. In the classic matching game introduced by Shapley and Shubik (Int J Game Theory 1(1):111---130, 1971) we are given an undirected graph G=(V,E) where vertices represent players, and we define the value of each subset S subseteq V as the cardinality of a maximum matching in the subgraph induced by S. The core of such a game contains all fair allocations of the value of V among the players, and is well-known to be non-empty iff graph G is stable. The stabilizer problem addresses the question of how to modify the graph to ensure that the core is non-empty. We show that this problem is vertex-cover hard. We prove that every minimum-cardinality stabilizer avoids some maximum matching of G. We use this insight to give efficient approximation algorithms for sparse graphs and for regular graphs. - Finding a Most Biased Coin with Fewest Flips
(with Richard Karp)
Conference on Learning Theory (COLT), 2014. [arXiv]| [Abstract]
We study the problem of learning a most biased coin among a set of coins by tossing the coins adaptively. The goal is to minimize the number of tosses until we identify a coin whose posterior probability of being most biased is at least 1 - delta for a given delta. Under a particular probabilistic model, we give an optimal algorithm, i.e., an algorithm that minimizes the expected number of future tosses. The problem is closely related to finding the best arm in the multi-armed bandit problem using adaptive strategies. Our algorithm employs an optimal adaptive strategy--a strategy that performs the best possible action at each step after observing the outcomes of all previous coin tosses. Consequently, our algorithm is also optimal for any given starting history of outcomes. To our knowledge, this is the first algorithm that employs an optimal adaptive strategy under a Bayesian setting for this problem. Our proof of optimality employs mathematical tools from the area of Markov games.
- Faster Private Release of Marginals on Small Databases
(with Justin Thaler, Jonathan Ullman, Andrew Wan)
Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science (ITCS), 2014. [pdf]| [arXiv]| [Abstract]
We study the problem of answering k-way marginal queries on a database D in ({0,1}^d)^n, while preserving differential privacy. The answer to a k-way marginal query is the fraction of the database's records x in {0,1}^d with a given value in each of a given set of up to k columns. Marginal queries enable a rich class of statistical analyses on a dataset, and designing efficient algorithms for privately answering marginal queries has been identified as an important open problem in private data analysis. For any k, we give a differentially private online algorithm that runs in time poly(n, min{ exp(d^{1-Omega(1/sqrt{k})}), exp(d / \log^{.99} d) } ) per query and answers any (adaptively chosen) sequence of poly(n) k-way marginal queries with error at most +/- .01 on every query, provided n >= d^{.51}. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first algorithm capable of privately answering marginal queries with a non-trivial worst-case accuracy guarantee for databases containing poly(d, k) records in time exp(o(d)). Our algorithm runs the private multiplicative weights algorithm (Hardt and Rothblum, FOCS) on a new approximate polynomial representation of the database.
We derive our representation for the database using techniques from approximation theory. More concretely, our representation uses approximations to the OR function by low-degree polynomials with coefficients of bounded L_1-norm. We derive our representation for the database by approximating the OR function restricted to low Hamming weight inputs using low-degree polynomials with coefficients of bounded L_1-norm. In doing so, we show new upper and lower bounds on the degree of such polynomials, which may be of independent approximation-theoretic interest. First, we construct a polynomial that approximates the d-variate OR function on inputs of Hamming weight at most k such that the degree of the polynomial is at most d^{1-Omega(1/sqrt{k})} and the L_1-norm of its coefficient vector is d^{0.01}. Then we show the following lower bound that exhibits the tightness of our approach: for any k = o(log d), any polynomial whose coefficient vector has L_1-norm poly(d) that pointwise approximates the d-variate OR function on all inputs of Hamming weight at most k must have degree d^{1-O(1/sqrt{k})}.
- Integer Feasibility of Random Polytopes
(with Santosh Vempala)
Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science (ITCS), 2014. [pdf]| [arXiv]| [Abstract]
We study integer programming instances over polytopes P(A,b)={x:Ax<=b} where the constraint matrix A is random, i.e., its entries are i.i.d. Gaussian or, more generally, its rows are i.i.d. from a spherically symmetric distribution. The radius of the largest inscribed ball is closely related to the existence of integer points in the polytope. We show that for m=2^O(sqrt{n}), there exist constants c_0 < c_1 such that with high probability, random polytopes are integer feasible if the radius of the largest ball contained in the polytope is at least c_1sqrt{log(m/n)}; and integer infeasible if the largest ball contained in the polytope is centered at (1/2,...,1/2) and has radius at most c_0sqrt{log(m/n)}. Thus, random polytopes transition from having no integer points to being integer feasible within a constant factor increase in the radius of the largest inscribed ball. We show integer feasibility via a randomized polynomial-time algorithm for finding an integer point in the polytope.
Our main tool is a simple new connection between integer feasibility and linear discrepancy. We extend a recent algorithm for finding low-discrepancy solutions (Lovett-Meka, FOCS '12) to give a constructive upper bound on the linear discrepancy of random matrices. By our connection between discrepancy and integer feasibility, this upper bound on linear discrepancy translates to the radius lower bound that guarantees integer feasibility of random polytopes.
- The Cutting Plane Method is Polynomial for Perfect Matchings
(with László Végh, Santosh Vempala)
Preliminary version in IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), 2012.
Mathematics of Operations Research, Vol. 41, No. 1, 2016. [pdf]| [arXiv]| [Abstract]
The cutting plane approach to optimal matchings has been discussed by several authors over the past decades (Padberg and Rao, Grotschel and Holland, Lovasz and Plummer, Trick, Fischetti and Lodi), and its convergence has been an open question. We prove that the cutting plane approach using Edmonds' blossom inequalities converges in polynomial time for the minimum-cost perfect matching problem. Our main insight is an LP-based method to retain/drop cuts. This careful cut retention procedure leads to a sequence of intermediate linear programs with a linear number of constraints whose optima are half-integral and supported by a disjoint union of odd cycles and edges. This structural property of the optima is instrumental in finding violated blossom inequalities (cuts) in linear time. Further, the number of cycles in the support of the half-integral optima acts as a potential function to show efficient convergence to an integral solution.
- Algorithms for Implicit Hitting Set Problems
(with Richard Karp, Erick Moreno-Centeno, Santosh Vempala)
ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), 2011. [pdf]| [arXiv]| [Abstract]
Motivated by instances of the hitting set problem where the number of sets to be hit is large, we introduce the notion of implicit hitting set problems. In an implicit hitting set problem the collection of sets to be hit is typically too large to list explicitly; instead, an oracle is provided which, given a set H, either determines that H is a hitting set or returns a set that H does not hit. We show a number of examples of classic implicit hitting set problems, and give a generic algorithm for solving such problems optimally. The main contribution of this paper is to show that this framework is valuable in developing approximation algorithms. We illustrate this methodology by presenting a simple on-line algorithm for the minimum feedback vertex set problem on random graphs. In particular our algorithm gives a feedback vertex set of size n-(1/p) log np(1-o(1)) with probability at least 3/4 for the random graph G(n,p) (the smallest feedback vertex set is of size n-(2/p) log np(1 + o(1))). We also consider a planted model for the feedback vertex set in directed random graphs. Here we show that a hitting set for a polynomial-sized subset of cycles is a hitting set for the planted random graph and this allows us to exactly recover the planted feedback vertex set.
- Satisfiability Thresholds for k-CNF Formula with Bounded Variable Intersections
(with Navin Goyal, Bernhard Haeupler) [pdf]| [arXiv]| [Abstract]
We determine the thresholds for the number of variables, number of clauses, number of clause intersection pairs and the maximum clause degree of a k-CNF formula that guarantees satisfiability under the assumption that every two clauses share at most alpha variables. More formally, we call these formulas alpha-intersecting and define, for example, a threshold mu_i(k,alpha) for the number of clause intersection pairs i, such that every alpha-intersecting k-CNF formula in which at most mu_i(k,alpha) pairs of clauses share a variable is satisfiable and there exists an unsatisfiable alpha-intersecting k-CNF formula with mu_m(k,alpha) such intersections. We provide a lower bound for these thresholds based on the Lovasz Local Lemma and a nearly matching upper bound by constructing an unsatisfiable k-CNF to show that mu_i(k,alpha) = Theta(2^{k(2+1/alpha)})$. Similar thresholds are determined for the number of variables (mu_n = Theta(2^{k/alpha})) and the number of clauses (mu_m = Theta(2^{k(1+(1/alpha))})) (see [Scheder08] for an earlier but independent report on this threshold). Our upper bound construction gives a family of unsatisfiable formula that achieve all four thresholds simultaneously.
- Deterministic Algorithms for the Lovász Local Lemma
(with Navin Goyal, Bernhard Haeupler)
Preliminary version in ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), 2010.
SIAM Journal on Computing, Vol. 42, Issue 6, 2013. [pdf]| [arXiv]| [Abstract]
Lovasz Local Lemma (LLL) is a powerful result in probability theory that is often used for non-constructive existence proofs of combinatorial structures. A prominent application is to k-CNF formulas, where LLL implies that if every clause in a formula shares variables with at most d<=2^k/e other clauses then such a formula has a satisfying assignment. Recently, a randomized algorithm to efficiently construct a satisfying assignment in this setting was given by Moser. Subsequently Moser and Tardos gave a general algorithmic framework for LLL and a randomized algorithm to construct the structures guaranteed by LLL. In this paper we address the main problem left open by Moser and Tardos of derandomizing this algorithm efficiently. Our algorithm works in the general framework of Moser--Tardos with a minimal loss in parameters. For the special case of constructing satisfying assignments for k-CNF formulas, for any epsilon in (0, 1) we give a deterministic algorithm that finds a satisfying assignment for any k-CNF formula with m clauses and d<=2^k/(1+epsilon) /e in time \tilde{O}(m^(2(1+1/{lower case epsilon})). This improves upon the deterministic algorithms of Moser and of Moser-Tardos with running times m^(Omega(k^2)) and m^(Omega(k/epsilon)) which are superpolynomial for k = omega(1) and upon other previous algorithms which work only for d<=2^(k/16)/e. Our algorithm is the first deterministic algorithm that works in the general framework of Moser--Tardos. Lastly we show how to obtain an NC, i.e., fully parallel, algorithm for the same setting.
- Thin Partitions: Isoperimetric Inequalities and Sampling Algorithms for some Nonconvex Families
(with Daniel Dadush, Santosh Vempala)
ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), 2010. [pdf]| [arXiv]| [Abstract]
Star-shaped bodies are an important nonconvex generalization of convex bodies (e.g., linear programming with violations). Here we present an efficient algorithm for sampling a given star-shaped body. The complexity of the algorithm grows polynomially in the dimension and inverse polynomially in the fraction of the volume taken up by the kernel of the star-shaped body. The analysis is based on a new isoperimetric inequality. Our main technical contribution is a tool for proving such inequalities when the domain is not convex. As a consequence, we obtain a polynomial algorithm for computing the volume of such a set as well. In contrast, linear optimization over star-shaped sets is NP-hard.
- Sampling s-Concave functions
(with Amit Deshpande, Santosh Vempala)
International Workshop on Randomization and Computation (RANDOM), 2009. [pdf]| [arXiv]| [Abstract]
Efficient sampling, integration and optimization algorithms for logconcave functions rely on the good isoperimetry of these functions. We extend this to show that -1/(n-1)-concave functions have good isoperimetry, and moreover, using a characterization of functions based on their values along every line, we prove that this is the largest class of functions with good isoperimetry in the spectrum from concave to quasi-concave. We give an efficient sampling algorithm based on a random walk for -1/(n-1)-concave probability densities satisfying a smoothness criterion, which includes heavy-tailed densities such as the Cauchy density. In addition, the mixing time of this random walk for Cauchy density matches the corresponding best known bounds for logconcave densities.
- An Observation about Variations of the Diffie-Hellman Assumption
(with Raghav Bhaskar, Satya V. Lokam, Peter L. Montgomery, Ramarathnam Venkatesan, Yacov Yacobi)
Serdica Journal of Computing, Vol 3, No. 3, 2009. [pdf]| [Abstract]
We generalize the Strong Boneh-Boyen (SBB) signature scheme to sign vectors (GSBB). We show that if a particular average case reduction from SBB to GSBB exists, then the Strong Diffie-Hellman (SDH) and the Computational Diffie-Hellman (CDH) have the same worst case complexity.
- Vulnerabilities in Anonymous Credential Systems
(with Raghav Bhaskar, Satya V. Lokam, Peter L. Montgomery, Ramarathnam Venkatesan, Yacov Yacobi)
Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science, Vol 197, No. 2, 2008. [pdf]| [Abstract]
We show the following:
(1) In existing anonymous credential revocation systems, the revocation authority can link the transactions of any user in a subset T of users in O(log T) fake failed sessions.
(2) A concern about the DLREP-I anonymous credentials system.
-
PhD Thesis:
New Approaches to Integer Programming. [pdf]