I am an assistant professor in Siebel School of Computing and Data Science at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Prior to joining the University of Illinois, I received my PhD from MIT and worked as a postdoctoral researcher at VMware Research Group.
I work on applied cryptography and secure distributed algorithms. I am generally interested in designing algorithms that are both practically efficient and provably secure. As a result, my research has been as theoretical as proving asymptotic bounds, and as practical as taping out a processor.
I always welcome motivated students. If you are interested in working with me, feel free to email me. If you have no prior experience in related areas, I recommend you check out my graduate courses first.
Email: renling at illinois dot edu.
CS 539 Distributed Algorithms, Spring 2023, Fall 2024.
Part of the material was taught as CS 598 (Fall 2019, Spring 2021, Spring 2022). I initially designed this class to teach blockchains in a manner consistent with the classic theory of distributed computing. The class has been expanded to cover other aspects of distributed algorithms including shared memory systems and non-fault-tolerant algorithms.
CS 461 Computer Security I, Fall 2020, Fall 2021, Fall 2022, Spring 2024, Spring 2025.
Currently, my research group focuses on threshold/distributed cryptography, cryptography for privacy protection, and fault-tolerant consensus (what most people call blockchain). I am thankful for the generous support of the National Science Foundation, Google, Meta, VMware, and Protocol Labs on our research. Here are some of our recent works.
Granular synchrony, a new network timing model that sits in between and unifies the classic synchrony, partial synchrony, and asynchrony models. Here is a talk.
A new method towards threshold cryptography under adaptive corruptions. We have applied it to the BLS threshold signature and are currently working on othes.
Practical private information retrieval (PIR), batch PIR, and stateful PIR protocols.
New protocols for distributed cryptography in asynchrony and without trusted setup: data dissemination, reliable broadcast, verifiable information dispersal, verifiable secret sharing, distributed key generation, and q-SDH trapdoor generation.
Simple and practical security analysis for Nakamoto consensus. This blog post gives an informal walk-through.
Byzantine consensus with dynamic participation. This is one of the most prominent novel features of Nakamoto consensus. See this blog post and this talk for details.
Byzantine consensus with minority faults: foundational algorithm, prototype system, and answer to the long-standing open problem on its optimal communication complexity.
Zhikun Wang and Ling Ren. Single-Server Client Preprocessing PIR with Tight Space-Time Trade-oﬀ. Eurocrypt 2025.
Ling Ren, Muhammad Haris Mughees, and Sun I. Simple and Practical Amortized Sublinear Private Information Retrieval using Dummy Subsets. CCS 2024. Code
Ananya Appan, David Heath, and Ling Ren. Oblivious Single Access Machines. CCS 2024.
Muhammad Haris Mughees and Ling Ren. Vectorized Batch Private Information Retrieval. S&P 2023. Code
Muhammad Haris Mughees, Hao Chen, and Ling Ren. OnionPIR: Response Efficient Single-Server PIR. CCS 2021. Code
Ling Ren, Christopher Fletcher, Albert Kwon, Marten van Dijk, and Srinivas Devadas. Design and Implementation of the Ascend Secure Processor. TDSC 2017. Code
Emil Stefanov, Marten van Dijk, Elaine Shi, Christopher Fletcher, Ling Ren, Xiangyao Yu, and Srinivas Devadas. Path ORAM: An Extremely Simple Oblivious RAM Protocol. CCS 2013. Best Student Paper. Top Picks in Hardware Embedded Security. CCS Test-of-Time Award.
Sourav Das, Zhuolun Xiang, Alin Tomescu, Alexander Spiegelman, Benny Pinkas, and Ling Ren. Verifiable Secret Sharing Simplified. S&P 2025. Code
Sourav Das and Ling Ren. Adaptively Secure BLS Threshold Signatures from DDH and co-CDH. Crypto 2024.
Sourav Das, Philippe Camacho, Zhuolun Xiang, Javier Nieto, Benedikt Bünz, and Ling Ren. Threshold Signatures from Inner Product Argument: Succinct, Weighted, and Multi-threshold. CCS 2023. Code
Sourav Das, Tom Yurek, Zhuolun Xiang, Andrew Miller, Lefteris Kokoris-Kogias, and Ling Ren. Practical Asynchronous Distributed Key Generation. S&P 2022. Code
Sourav Das, Zhuolun Xiang, and Ling Ren. Asynchronous Data Dissemination and its Applications. CCS 2021. Best Paper Runner-up.
Neil Giridharan, Ittai Abraham, Natacha Crooks, Kartik Nayak, and Ling Ren. Granular Synchrony. DISC 2024.
Atsuki Momose and Ling Ren. Constant Latency in Sleepy Consensus. CCS 2022.
Dongning Guo and Ling Ren. Bitcoin's Latency--Security Analysis Made Simple. AFT 2022. Bitcoin Research Prize.
Atsuki Momose and Ling Ren. Optimal Communication Complexity of Authenticated Byzantine Agreement. DISC 2021.
Ittai Abraham, Kartik Nayak, Ling Ren, and Zhuolun Xiang. Good-case Latency of Byzantine Broadcast: a Complete Categorization. PODC 2021.
Ittai Abraham, Dahlia Malkhi, Kartik Nayak, Ling Ren, and Maofen Yin. Sync HotStuff: Simple and Practical Synchronous State Machine Replication, S&P 2020. Code
Ananya Appan (co-advised with David Heath)
Ziling Yang
Javier Nieto
Pranav Shriram Arunachalaramanan
Zhuolun (Daniel) Xiang (PhD 2022 --> Aptos)
Muhammad Haris Mughees (PhD 2024 --> Apple)
Vinith Krishnan (MS 2021 --> Nvidia)
Hung Tran (MS 2021)
Jong Chan Lee (MS 2022 --> Apple)
Irene Isaac (MS 2022)
Zhikun Wang (MS 2024)