Charith Mendis I lead the ADAPT lab at UIUC. Check out our current work there including our latest projects and publications. Bio Charith Mendis is an Assistant Professor in the Siebel School of Computing and Data Science at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. His broad research interests are at the intersection of compilers, program optimization and machine learning. He received his Ph.D. and Master’s from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and his B.Sc. from the University of Moratuwa. He is the recipient of a DARPA Young Faculty Award, an NSF CAREER Award, the William A. Martin outstanding master’s thesis award at MIT and the university gold medal for his B.Sc. He has won numerous paper awards including a Distinguished Paper Award at POPL, a Best Student Paper Award at the IEEE BigData conference, an honorable mention for the Best Artifact Award at SIGMOD, a Best Paper Award at ML for Systems workshop at ISCA and an IEEE Top Picks Honorable Mention. Office: 4118, Siebel Center for Computer Science 201 N. Goodwin Ave., Urbana IL 61801 Email: charithm (at) illinois.edu New! I am hiring a postdoc to work on projects related to both correctness and performance of tensor compilers and heterogeneous systems. If this sounds interesting, please drop me an email with the title, “Prospective Postdoc (ADAPT)”. New! Check out our new course on CS521: ML and compilers Research Opportunities ADAPT lab has opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students. If you are a student who is passionate about building high performance ML optimization or compilation techniques or is passionate about automated compiler construction techniques using either machine learning or formal methods, please be in touch with me. Click to read instructions before contacting me. Undergraduates or Master's students at UIUC: Please include a CV, an up-to-date transcript, and your programming experience. The subject line should contain the word "prospective undergraduate/master's researcher" to indicate these instructions have been read. Please note that, since we are doing systems work at least 2 semesters worth of commitment is required to get fruitful results (e.g. a publication) out of your experience. Also, I will not agree to supervise any final year Master's students. Prospective PhD students: First, you must apply and gain admission to the graduate program in Computer Science at UIUC. You should mention me as a potential advisor in your application as well as in your personal statement. Once you apply, you can optionally send me an email with subject "prospective PhD student". If you are admitted, then I'm happy to discuss supervision. News | Aug 12, 2025 | New! Our work on a language and a compiler for optimizing GNNs was accepted at OOPSLA 2025. Altogether, ADAPT group will be presenting 3 papers at OOPSLA 2025 (including R1) in October! | |---|---| | Jul 21, 2025 | New! Our work on optimizing GNNs using different sparse and dense matrix primitive compositions was accepted at CGO 2026 | | Jul 14, 2025 | New! Our work on standardizing and formalizing the semantics for tensor accelerator ISAs accepted at MICRO 2025! Congratulations team! | | Jun 23, 2025 | New! Received the inaugural 2025 Google ML and Systems Junior Faculty Award for our work on ML Compiler Optimization. Thank you, Google! | | May 01, 2025 | Our work on ML-based cost models for emerging sparse accelerators accepted at ICML 2025! | | Mar 30, 2025 | 1 paper accepted at PLDI 2025! | | Mar 15, 2025 | Dias receives an honorable mention for the Best Artifact Award at SIGMOD 2025! | | Jan 31, 2025 | Our paper on Approximate Query Processing, PilotDB, has been accepted at SIGMOD 2025. | | Jan 14, 2025 | TensorRight receives a distinguished paper award at POPL 2025! | | Dec 18, 2024 | 2 papers accepted at OOPSLA 2025! | Funding I am truly thankful for the sponsors of our research at the ADAPT lab. In particular, we are partially funded by the ACE center, one of the seven centers in JUMP 2.0, a Semiconductor Research Corporation (SRC) program sponsored by DARPA, by National Science Foundation (NSF), by DARPA, by IIDAI and through generous gifts and cloud computing resources from Google, Intel, Amazon and Qualcomm.