About About Us The Systems Platform Research Group (Illinois PlatformX) was established by Prof. Jian Huang at UIUC in 2018. Our group consists of students from both CS and ECE departments. We enjoy building both hardware and software systems, with a focus on the software/hardware co-design. Our research interests lie in the areas of computer systems and architecture, including memory and storage systems, AI platform and infrastructure, distributed systems, systems security, and especially the intersections of them. Our research contributions have been published at top-tier systems, architecture, and security conferences, such as ISCA, OSDI, SOSP, ASPLOS, MICRO, PLDI, FAST, and CCS. Some of them are being transferred into products, and have been featured by CACM, the Register, PCWorld, ZDNet, and many other media agencies. Our research is partially sponsored by NSF, DoE, Army Research, IBM-Illinois Discovery Accelerator Institute, Western Digital, Google, Intel, NetApp, and IBM. Research Active Research Projects Accelerator-Centric Memory & Storage Break the memory wall for AI systems with algorithm/system/hardware co-design. Sustainable AI Infrastructure Develop systems and architecture techniques to advance AI infrastructures in a sustainable manner. Agentic Operating Systems Develop next-generatin infrastructure and operating system for supporting agentic AI applications. AI for Systems and Architecture Rethink the design, implementation, and management of computer systems with AI techniques. Energy-Efficient AI Chip Develop architecture, compiler, and software system techniques for energy-efficient AI chips. Join Us We usually have a few Ph.D. openings every year. We welcome master and undergraduate students to join us, and encourage them to drive projects in our group. We also have research internship openings for undergraduate students every summer. Interested in joining us? Please contact Prof. Jian Huang with your CV and research interests. Projects Recent Research Highlights Papers Recent Publications - SkyByte: Architecting an Efficient Memory-Semantic CXL-based SSD with OS and Hardware Co-design - Coach: Exploiting Temporal Patterns for All-Resource Oversubscription in Cloud Platforms - ByteFS: System Support for (CXL-based) Memory-Semantic Solid-State Drives - FleetIO: Managing Multi-Tenant Cloud Storage with Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning - Scaling Deep Learning Computation over the Inter-Core Connected Intelligence Processor with T10 - Hardware-Assisted Virtualization of Neural Processing Units for Cloud Platforms - HADES: Hardware-Assisted Distributed Transactions in the Age of Fast Networks and SmartNICs - Exploring the Efficiency of Renewable Energy-based Modular Data Centers at Scale - Learning to Drive Software-Defined Solid-State Drives - G10: Enabling An Efficient Unified GPU Memory and Storage Architecture with Smart Tensor Migrations - RackBlox: A Software-Defined Rack-Scale Storage System with Network-Storage Co-Design - System Virtualization for Neural Processing Units - The Security War in File Systems: An Empirical Study from A Vulnerability-Centric Perspective - V10: Hardware-Assisted NPU Multi-tenancy for Improved Resource Utilization and Fairness - LeaFTL: A Learning-Based Flash Translation Layer for Solid-State Drives - Learning to Drive Software-Defined Storage - BlockFlex: Enabling Storage Harvesting with Software-Defined Flash in Modern Cloud Platforms - RSSD: Defend Against Ransomware with Hardware-Isolated Network-Storage Codesign and Post-Attack Analysis - Understanding and Detecting Deep Memory Persistency Bugs in NVM Programs with DeepMC - IceClave: A Trusted Execution Environment for In-Storage Computing - Distributed Data Persistency - Pinpointing Crash-Consistency Bugs in the HPC I/O Stack: A Cross-Layer Approach - UniHeap: Managing Persistent Objects Across Managed Runtimes for Non-Volatile Memory - Hoop: Efficient Hardware-Assisted Out-of-Place Update for Non-Volatile Memory Team Group Members Alumni Graduated Students