Tal August Assistant Professor, School of Computing and Data Science, University of Illinois Urbana Champaign I am an assistant professor at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. I study how to adapt language to different audiences, with a focus on knowledge intensive domains like science, health and legal communication. I conduct empirical analyses to study how changes in language will affect different audiences, and I build intelligent reading and writing systems for augmenting our language in new ways. The long term goal of my research is to improve our communication with—and understanding of—one another through technology. I previously was a Young Investigator at the Allen Institute for AI. I received my PhD at the Paul G. Allen School for Computer Science and Engineering at the University of Washington, advised by Katharina Reinecke and Noah Smith. My CV: PDF. Interested in working with me? If you are interested in working with me, instead of emailing me please fill out this interest survey. As much as I would like to, I rarely have time to respond to emails from prospective students. The interest form is the best way of getting in touch with me. Ph.D. student applicants: I will be recruiting 1 to 2 students for Fall 2025, please fill out the interest form, apply to UIUC CS, and mention me in your application. news | Dec 15, 2025 | Honored to be make the List Teachers Ranked as Excellent by Their Students! I had a great time teaching my class. | |---|---| | Dec 9, 2024 | Thank you to the Allen Institute for AI for a generous gift to research personalizing literature searches to individual researchers! | | Oct 28, 2024 | Excited to give a talk on augmented reading and science communicatation at the First Annual Summit on Responsible Computing, AI, and Society | | Jun 15, 2023 | I will join the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign as an assistant professor, starting Fall 2024. | | Jan 30, 2023 | Excited to be returning to the Allen Institute for AI as a Young Investigator. | selected publications - How Language Formality in Security and Privacy Interfaces Impacts Intended ComplianceProceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2023 - Writing Strategies for Science Communication: Data and Computational AnalysisIn Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), 2020